[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In Peru, there are
ancient buildings,
which define modern technology.
How could inhabitants
of ancient Peru
build these wonders without
having any modern know-how?
They did provide an answer.
They believe the gods
transmitted their knowledge.
The heritage of an
evolved civilization
with an extraordinary
technology, today forgotten.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
More than a century has passed
since the first finding,
but the gusty winds of
the Paracas Peninsula,
about 250 kilometers
south of Lima,
have not removed traces of
the giant drawing carved
in the sand.
It is called the Paracas
Trident, or Candelabra.
It seems that it was created
by the Paracas culture, who
inhabited this region
between 300 BC and 280 AD,
but this is just conjecture.
In fact, the few
stories which do
mention it don't
reveal the authors,
and neither do they indicate
its date of creation.
No analyses are available
to date a simple excavation
in the sand, and no
organic finds nearby
were unearthed like clothing,
tools, or other finds
crucial for carbon-14
dating, which are normally
associated with a place
to define a, more or less,
accurate date.
Even its significance
is uncertain.
It was conjectured that it
could be a sign pointing
towards areas of the
ancient empire like Cuzco,
Machu Picchu, or Nazca.
But when checked, it appeared
that its central axis
extends and ends directly
in the Pacific Ocean.
Others have conjectured
that it could
be a religious symbol,
perhaps the tree of life,
or the representation on Earth
of a constellation, perhaps
the Southern Cross.
In any case, the
almost 200 meters
of the central vertical
axis, the nearly 120 meters
of the horizontal axis, and
the 40 degree inclination
seem devised to make it
visible from a great distance--
a signal, therefore,
a sort of lighthouse.
Arriving from the
sea, in fact, it
starts to be seen even
more than 15 kilometers
from the coastline.
But arriving from the sky,
it can be seen even sooner.
According to research by
Professor Zecharia Sitchin,
one of the world's
greatest scholars
on Sumerian cuneiform
writing and an expert
on ancient
civilizations, the symbol
represents Viracocha
and marks the point
where the areas visited
by the ancient god start.
A higher entity, the
head of a population who
could glide over water and fly,
worshiped with different names
throughout Central
and South America,
who had restored civilization
after the Great Flood.
Viracocha, however,
did not resemble
the people who inhabited
the continent at the time.
He did not have dark skin
and wasn't clean-shaven,
but was rather white-skinned
and had a beard.
Could he have been
the survivor of
an ancient, evolved
civilization today forgotten,
who had escaped a world-wide
catastrophe, the head
of a small group with a
technology not understood
by those ancient populations?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The ancient Paracas population
lived around the Candelabrum
area and was simple
and peaceful people.
They survived on fishing
and rudimentary agriculture.
They were skilled weavers and
created beautiful, painted
ceramic wear.
This lifestyle, however,
is in sharp contrast
to the practice they
are mostly known for,
drilling and deforming skulls.
Deforming was achieved by
wrapping the head of newborns
with bandages or
wooden boards, which
compressed the
bones of the skull
to make them grow abnormally.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This custom must have
caused much pain.
Nevertheless, it was practiced
for an extremely long time,
and it also spread
to more distant lands
like Egypt, Malta,
and Central America.
Ancient, deformed skulls dating
back more than 6,000 years
were found in these areas.
Today, the true reason
behind this custom
has yet to be discovered.
Aesthetic reasons do not seem
to justify its use, and the fact
that its spread to civilizations
which had no direct contact
renders its expansion
even more unfathomable.
Other populations, too,
practice deformities
which, today, are considered
abhorrent like the Mayan custom
to induce strabismus or the
Chinese to deform women's feet.
But these habits have remained
confined to those cultures
without spreading
to other populations
like skull deformation has.
This deformity was also
considered a distinctive sign
and performed only
within the highest ranks.
The Viracocha representations,
which have come down to us,
depict a being with a
stocky bust, short legs,
and especially big head.
Could it be that
deforming skulls
was a way to resemble the gods?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Ica is a town south of Lima.
Its small museum holds an
unsolved archaeological
mystery.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Dr. Javier Cabrera
Darquea was a doctor
in the small town of Ica.
Loved and respected by the
people all the more because he
was a descendant of
the city founders,
he progressively transformed his
doctors surgery into a museum.
Today, the three rooms
hosting the museum
hold about 11,000 stones,
which weigh from a few grams
to 500 kilos.
These are carbonized andesites
of volcanic origin and date
back to the Mesozoic Era.
There are several
incisions on their surface.
The story starts in 1966,
when a friend gave Cabrera
a stone with the drawing of a
prehistoric animal engraved.
He discovered that it
had been found next
to the Ocucaje Desert and
that there were many more.
The stones had also
generated some trading.
In fact, the farmers
would collect the stones
and sell them to
tourists as souvenirs.
They told him that the stones
had been brought to light
in 1960 after the
flooding of the Río Ica.
Cabrera was thunderstruck.
Thereafter, the Peruvian doctor
started to collect and study
these stones with passion,
a mission he pursued
until his death in 2001.
As he continued in his
research, the doctor
was increasingly convinced
that the drawings carved
on the stones were not just
simple, artistic creations,
but some sort of
ideographic writing.
The images, in fact, were
subdivided by Cabrera
into subjects and illustrate
the complex knowledge
of, more or less, familiar
subjects like astronomy
and geography, but also
more unusual like surgery.
The stones can, therefore,
be rightfully considered
as pages of a vast library.
Their surfaces depict
representations
of body parts, heart
transplants, maps
of the entire planet which
reveal how continents were
millions of years
ago, astronomers
who study the passage of
heavenly bodies, wagons
drawn by horses, kangaroos,
men with dinosaurs.
But if dinosaurs became
extinct 65 million years ago,
and it is thought that
man's appearance on Earth
only dates back a few
million years ago,
how can it be that they
are depicted together
on these stones?
It is difficult to imagine that
this civilization had reached
the degree of knowledge
represented in these scenes
during such a distant era.
Anatomy, in fact, was
only born in the 1400s,
while the first heart transplant
only dates back to 1967.
The knowledge that
the Earth is round
only goes back a
few centuries BC,
and the use of the telescope
for astronomic studies
is owed to Galileo
Galilei in the 1600s.
Horses became extinct
thousands of years
before they were reintroduced
by the Spanish to the Americas
in the 1500s.
And the ancient
inhabitants of Peru
never used the wheel, while
the pre-Columbian populations
certainly did not know
what kangaroos were.
Are we faced with the greatest
archaeological discovery
of our times or with
a resounding fraud?
Various archaeologists
believe these are counterfeits
mainly created by a
couple of campesinos
to sell them to
tourists, and this theory
needs to take into account
the following data.
It is estimated that,
between the Cabrera finds,
those owned by
Peruvian collectors,
and those taken abroad,
the amount of carved stones
amounts to over 50,000 pieces.
Now, that's an enormous amount,
even for a tireless couple
of forgers.
In addition, many stones weigh
several hundred kilograms.
Why create such cumbersome
souvenirs so hard to sell?
And it is really hard to believe
that two campesinos barely
able to read and
write could ever
have acquired the scientific
knowledge carved on the stones.
The reporter Juan de Santa
Cruz Pachacuti Yamqui,
in an article of
the 1500s, reports
that the Incas would call them
[? Manco ?] stones, meaning
power stones, and
these were part
of the funerary vestiges
of noble families based
on an ancient tradition.
This is confirmed by the
fact that, in August 1966,
several samples were
found in pre-Inca tombs
by the president of Lima's
Polytechnic Institute, Mr.
Santiago Agurto Calvo, and by
the archaeologist Alejandro
Pezzia of the National
Institute of Archeology in Peru.
The news appeared in
December of the same year
in the scientific supplement
of a Lima daily newspaper,
but the most sensational
scientific fact
derives from the lab
analysis on the stones.
Cabrera had them
analyzed by the mining
engineering company
Mauricio Hochschild.
And by the Mineralogy
and Petrology Institute
of Bonn University in Germany.
Based on the oxidation layer,
which covers the engravings,
it seems that the
stones were engraved
at least 12,000 years ago.
The Lima Aeronautic Museum,
which owns about 60 samples,
had the analysis repeated,
and the data were confirmed.
The engravings are at
least 12,000 years old.
Obviously, these
are not the millions
of years which can be
surmised from the scenes
with men and dinosaurs
living together.
Yet even 12,000 years ago,
dinosaurs were already extinct,
and we know of no
civilizations of the time which
had such advanced knowledge.
According to Cabrera,
this culture,
which he called
gliptolihic civilization,
disappeared due to
a planet catastrophe
caused by the wrong use
of their own technology.
Could they perhaps be survivors
who created their engravings
to hand down their knowledge and
history to generations to come?
It is also true that farmers
can realize imitations--
and there are many--
but these are easy
to unmask with tests.
That's why the Ica stones
remain an archaeological mystery
with their fantastic
representations.
Brain transplants,
pyramid systems
to transform solar
energy and distributed
for use, flying
machines resembling
strange mechanical birds.
But human flight is one of
the greatest breakthroughs
of the modern age.
Only some time ago, it was
believed an impossible feat.
And the use of the sun
as a source of energy
is also a recent victory.
Who is this unknown
population which
emerges from the
chasm of time with
this sophisticated knowledge?
The aspect of gliptolihic
men incredibly
resembles the
Viracocha depictions,
especially the one found
on the Door of the Sun
in Tiahuanaco on the shores of
the Titicaca Lake in Bolivia.
In fact, there's a man with
stumpy legs, large belly,
and large head out of
proportion to his body,
the same physical makeup
of the gliptolihic men.
After all, Ica is next
to the Candelabrum area
inhabited by the
Paracas, and in order
to best underline
their affiliation
to the noble classes,
they would deform skulls.
Perhaps to resemble
the ancient Viracochas?
The Paracas also
perforated skulls.
And on the Ica stones,
the gliptolihic men
are depicted performing
brain surgery.
And yet on the
Paracas Peninsula,
there's the Candelabrum, which,
according to Zecharia Sitchin,
indicates the beginning of
the areas where Viracocha
had lived with his group.
And Ica is also next
to the Nazca Plain,
where there are large
drawings only visible
from the sky,
drawings which we find
engraved in the Ica stones.
Is this only a
casual coincidence?
Perhaps the Nazca Plain
could add other elements
to this research.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The Pan-American sur cuts
through the vast Nazca Desert
Plain with its drawings, which
having engaged researches
from around the
world in the attempt
to explain the mystery
like a dark gash.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The stretch between
kilometer 419 and 465
passes right in the middle
of the mysterious drawings,
but from land, it is
impossible to understand
their true aspect.
At first, only stones
are visible, furrows,
which are not that
deep, and clear spaces
with different colors
and undefined shapes.
From the tower, 14
meters high, visibility
improves only a little,
yet over 200 drawings
and almost 13,000
geometric figures
are spread over its
entire expansion.
Only from above is it
possible to realize
the true essence of the
shapes traced on the ground.
The Nazca Plain is one
of the planet's driest
and most inhospitable.
In fact, rainfall only amounts
to 1 cubic centimeter per year,
more or less a quarter
of an hour of rain
over a 12 month span.
A real hellish,
barren, and stony land,
but at the same
time, the ideal place
to trace images which
can remain unchanged
throughout the centuries.
>> [SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> These lands are quite unique.
After penetrating the path
with some walking over them,
you realize that, even
in 100 years time,
the same tracks will still be
here, because they are formed
by a layer of
[? ferra ?] stones,
which reflect the
heat during the day,
forming a vortex of hot air,
which does not allow sand
to deposit, but
moves it to the side.
These stones are superficial,
brown, and if trodden upon,
you find the white earth
emerges, thus remaining
permanently exposed.
That's why these lines have kept
visible all these centuries.
>> An ideal land to preserve
the geometric figures in time,
but it doesn't explain how
the ancient inhabitants
of the area, the Nazca, could
draw them and trace kilometric
lines, most of which are
only visible from the sky.
>> [SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> Many drawings can easily
be observed from the hilltops
or mountains which
surround the desert.
Others, definitely big,
cannot be seen these heights.
It is extremely hard.
And since they can be observed
as a whole only from above,
the question is how
have they been created.
We don't know.
It's a mystery.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hence, as Professor
Azabache claims,
in order to have an overview of
the larger drawings and direct
the creative work, an overview
was necessary and achievable
only from the height of
a sufficiently high hill.
But on the plane,
there aren't any.
Therefore, that
only leaves flight.
But who had the capacity to fly
over this plane centuries ago?
The oral tradition of the
Nazca speaks clearly--
the Viracochas.
The figures have been drawn
with an accuracy which
has baffled researchers
who have examined them.
The zoomorphic
drawings have been
traced with one,
continuous line,
meaning with a technique which
is even more difficult in terms
of lines and geometries.
One would think these
are more recent as they
are more sophisticated,
but on the contrary,
they are more ancient.
Therefore, the
logic which states
that human progress
grows in time
fails with the regression
of technical capacity.
How can this be explained?
Perhaps the inhabitants
of the plain
ran out of crucial
technical support.
Oral tradition
helps by reporting
that, suddenly,
the Viracochas left
for an unknown destination.
Could this be the
right explanation?
When they left,
the Nazca found it
impossible to trace
other zoomorphic figures,
so they were limited to
continue drawing easier
lines and geometric figures.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Only in modern times
did man understand
what had been drawn in the
Nazca Plain, an era when
man had realized his
ancient dream, to fly.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The first to discover
the true nature
of the inexplicable farrows
traced on the ground
was the American geographer
Paul Kosok in 1939.
While he flew over the area
with the night aircraft,
he tried to discover
the mystery,
guessing it was an
astronomic calendar.
But the most famous
researcher who
tried to unveil the
mystery behind these lines
was Maria Reiche, a German.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The scholar, affectionately
called the Lady of the Pampas,
also fought hard to safeguard
this extraordinary site,
managing to have it proclaimed
patrimony of humanity
by UNESCO.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In the city of Nazca, an
association and a museum
have been named after her.
Her grave is in the
garden of the museum.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> It was an order by Mary
to bury her body in a tomb,
which we keep in this museum.
She wants to be
part of this area,
feel surrounded and safeguarded
by these lines and drawings.
>> Reiche dedicated her life
to studying the drawings
of the plain starting in 1949,
a passion which kept her going
till the very end in
1998, the year she died.
Her conjecture is amongst
those most highly esteemed.
>> [SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> There are many conjectures,
but the most widely embraced is
that by German
doctor Maria Reiche,
who claims it is a large,
astronomic calendar used
for agriculture.
>> Viktoria Nikitzki lives
in the town of Nazca and knew
Reiche during the last
years of her life,
when the scholar had become
blind and paralyzed in her bed.
She writes promotional material
on the drawings in the Nazca
Plain and illustrates
to tourists
the wonderful work carried
out by Maria Reiche
by means of a simple,
plastic model.
>> [SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> The spider and the monkey
are directly linked to the Big
Dipper constellation, in
the case of the monkey,
and to the Orion constellation,
in the case of the spider.
Both are connected to
the summer solstice.
This was how it was possible
to forecast rainfalls.
>> A huge, astronomic calendar.
Is this the answer?
But was such complexity
really necessary only
to achieve an astronomic
calendar which,
amongst other things,
could be realized in a less
colossal and laborious size?
An astronomic calendar
for agricultural use
also, surely, had to be
completed quickly for survival,
but archaeologists speak of
1,500 years for its creation.
In addition, why realize such
a mammoth work which could only
be seen from the sky in flight?
Without this capacity,
the great majority
of signs traced on the
ground becomes inexplicable
and therefore useless.
Finally, many
drawings, if subjected
to computer inspections, find
no astronomical reference
whatsoever.
Therefore, Reiche's
studies only partially
unveil the Pampa's mystery.
And the enigmatic figure traced
on the side of a small hill
seems to look and salute
someone in flight.
But who flew in
the distant past?
A plot which thickens even
more over the past few years
with the discovery of other
drawings and geometric
figures in the close
by Palpa Plain.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The style is similar
to the Nazca,
but these date
further back in time
and are still only
comprehensible
from above in flight.
Finally, the Nazca
and Palpa drawings
cover a total area of nearly
600 square kilometers,
and to be created, thousands
of tons of stones were shifted.
Only a very important
reason could justify
any activity of this magnitude.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The Antonini Educational
Museum is in the town of Nazca,
where many archaeological
finds of the Nazca culture
are kept, the last
to have inhabited
this land before the Incas,
who incorporated them
into their empire, canceling
out all their customs
and traditions.
The Nazca had reached an
incredible artistic and
cultural level witnessed
by the exquisitely painted
ceramic wear and by the
sophisticated and efficient
underground aqueduct
system they had built.
There are no elements
in these finds which
help clarify the
mystery of the origins
and the significance
of the drawings
of the plain except
for one engraved
stone found in the Nazca Tomb.
The workmanship is not as
accurate as that of the Ica
stones, and the
drawings depict elements
ascribable to the
daily Nazca world.
But why would the
Nazca engrave stones
when they were perfectly
capable of painting exquisitely
colorful ceramic
wear and weaving
finely embroidered blankets?
Perhaps it was a
way of responding
to what they had
seen in finds they
believed to be of great
importance like the Ica stones.
Once again, the
engraved stones, which
were considered stones
of power, reappear.
Or were they, perhaps,
even stones of knowledge?
Is there a true connection
between the Ica and the Nazca?
A 1586 report written by a
magistrate, Luis de Monzón,
explained what the plains
natives said about the origins
of the drawings.
During extremely ancient
times, a small group of people
called Viracochas, who
differed from the Indios,
reached this land,
and the Indios
obeyed them, followed
them, and realized roads
which can still be seen today.
The Viracochas suddenly
left, but promised
to return, a memory and a
promise which was kept so alive
in those people to deceive
the Incas and Aztecs when
they met the conquistadores
for the first time.
The Spanish were exchanged
for the gods who had returned,
thus allowing a handful of men
to defeat well-trained and much
more powerful armies.
But truthfully, who were the
Viracochas, a myth, a legend,
or a historical truth?
Were they the true inspirers
of the great civilizations
of the past?
Could the gods be
the survivors of
a remote and forgotten
civilization which
had reached a level of progress
equal to, or higher than,
the current one?
The Monzón chronicle and
the engraved stone exhibited
at the Antonini
Museum add a new,
important detail
to the other clues,
and the ancient oral traditions
seem increasingly less
of a myth, of a legend,
to become history.
The Marcahuasi
Meseta lies on top
of a 4,200 meter mountain 80
kilometers northeast of Lima.
It is little known still
today, also because in order
to reach it, one has to organize
a true expedition rather
than a small trip.
In fact, the final
section of the road
to reach San Pedro de Casta,
the last inhabited center
of the Meseta Valley,
is a mule track,
which clambers up the sides
of the mountain for about
30 kilometers, large
enough for a car to pass.
Driving along the road
at night without a guide
who knows the place is an
even more difficult task.
In fact, a five hour
trip is required
to reach the small
pueblo 3,200 meters up.
Mass tourism with
its comforts has not
yet spoiled the
primitive territory
surrounding the plateau.
Marcahuasi was discovered by the
Peruvian archaeologist Daniel
Ruzo de los Heros in the '50s.
His research convinced
him that there
were some entrances to
the mythical network
of underground
tunnels which cross
South America and the
ruins of sculptures
realized in a distant era by an
unknown and extremely evolved
population, which
he called Masma.
Could it be another trace of
the passage of the mythical
Viracochas?
In the small San
Pedro de Casta museum,
there are many meseta
finds discovered by Ruzo.
They come from a
settlement of Incas,
who lived in Marcahuasi long
before the disappearance
of the mysterious Masma culture.
Amongst the various types
of finds the mummies
with their facial
expressions paralyzed
in a moment of eternal terror.
Perhaps they are the
vestiges of Inca prisoners
tortured during the
Spanish conquest.
But this is not a certainty.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The unpaved, small
square of San Pedro
is from where visitors to
the plateau usually depart.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The path leading to Marcahuasi
is even more difficult
than the one departing
from the valley.
It can only be covered by foot
or with pack animals, which
become even more indispensable
when heavy, cumbersome luggage
needs to be transported
to the meseta
at an altitude of 4,000 meters.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
From one of the highest
points, the first ruins
of the ancient
Inca settlement can
be seen, while further
on, there are even more.
The meseta, in
fact, takes its name
from these ruins, one of
the few Inca constructions
to be built on two
inhabitable floors.
And the name "Marcahuasi" means
exactly "home with two floors."
Daniel Ruzo de los Heros
has studied the ruins
of the meseta for
eight years in a row,
stationing at the plateau
for six months a year.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The small heart where the
archaeologist would camp
is still in an excellent
state and an obliged stopover
for anyone visiting Marcahuasi.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Manuel Olivares is
an expert guide who
knows the meseta inside out.
He accompanied [? Ruzo ?]
during the last years, when
the archaeologists studied
the Marcahuasi sculptures
and cavities.
Even today, Don
Manuel acts as a guide
to the very few
tourists and researchers
who adventure to the meseta.
>> [SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> In 1952, Daniel Ruzo came
here for the very first time,
and we climbed to Marcahuasi.
I worked with him for eight
years, six months a year.
He would work a week in Lima and
the other week in Marcahuasi.
This was his job
during those years.
>> Don Manuel still accompanies
visitors to the meseta
to settle into their campsite,
a natural amphitheater sheltered
from the winds which
blow over the plateau.
From here, in order to reach
a canal, which Ruzo believed
communicated with the mythical
network of underground tunnels
connecting places hundreds
of kilometers afar, at least
an hour's walk is needed.
The place is called Infiernillo,
meaning "little hell,"
and the name exactly
sums up what the natives
think of this tunnel.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The entrance to the canal is
about seven meters underground,
and it can be reached by
crossing a cleft between two
gigantic rocks.
When Ruzo used to work here,
Manuel did lower himself
down various meters,
but the archaeologist
feared for his safety
and prevented him
from continuing the descent.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
To reach the entrance,
it is important to have
mountain gear.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Unfortunately, the
heavy rainfalls
which have hit the meseta
have brought mud and silt,
which now block the entrance.
To open it, suitable
excavation equipment
would be required with
long working days.
But the tunnels are not
the only Marcahuasi enigma.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The plateau is also
the showcase of dozens
of mysterious drawings found
and catalogued buy Ruzo.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The archaeologist claimed that
the technique used by the Masma
to carve the Marcahuasi
rocks differs
from any known to mankind.
He defined it organic
sculpture and believed
it derived from extremely
advanced knowledge
from a different way of viewing
reality and representing
shapes, a world where magical
power and the earth and sky
bond were of
fundamental importance.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> About 32 drawings can
be found in Marcahuasi,
and each one of these only peaks
the curiosity to discover how
it was possible to realize them.
In my personal opinion,
it seems obvious
that these were extremely
well-prepared people
with another type of mentality,
a very special civilization
with great knowledge.
>> Ruzo discovered that, in
order to recognize the drawings
carved in the rock, they
should be viewed from the right
distance and angle, and
the precise light and shade
conditions at the
right time of day,
and even right
season of the year.
Lacking these prerequisites, the
sculptures are indecipherable.
This rock was called the
African Lion by the scholar,
and one can guess
the profile only
when looking from a
certain perspective,
exactly as explained by Ruzo.
If viewed from other angles, it
shows no comprehensible shape.
Identifying the sculptures
is made even more difficult
by natural erosion due to
the enormous amount of time
passed since their creation.
The period surmised by Ruzo
dates back much further
than the common accepted time
to extremely ancient eras
over 10,000 years
ago, an age which
would have certainly
transformed tools or handiwork
left by the mysterious
sculptors to dust,
making any test currently
available to date
the drawings
practically useless.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> This is Marcahuasi, and this
is the Monument for Humanity.
We have come here
so that you can
learn about it and the other
drawings which are here.
>> The most famous work at
Marcahuasi is the Monument
for Humanity.
Ruzo had come up with this name,
but its existence was already
known by the indigenous
population for a long time,
and they called it
the Head of the Inca.
It is 25 meters tall
and is very eroded,
but the profile
is clearly human.
Ruzo discovered
that, by glancing
at it from different angles
and light conditions,
other faces of various sizes
belonging to all human races
appeared on its surface.
That's how it gained its current
name, Monumento a la Humanidad.
Other drawings can be
seen from the plateau.
Some are clearly identifiable.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Others are hidden in
the mysterious landscape
of the meseta, awaiting
the ideal conditions
to unveil themselves to
the eyes of observers.
But many archaeologists did not
agree on the artificial origin
of the sculptures.
They claim that they were
created by natural erosion
and weather conditions.
Fully convinced
of his discovery,
Ruzo invited
important researchers
to visit and study
the sculptures
and data he had collected.
The German Albert Giesecke,
the Frenchman Marcel Homet,
the Austrian archaeologist
Hans Schindler Bellamy,
and the Englishman
Peter Allen all
agreed with the theories
supported by Ruzo.
Allen, personally, visited
the Marcahuasi sculptures
and was so impressed
he said, the fact
that they have this peculiarity
implies an uncommon technique.
Once more, the science
world was divided
into two opposite stands.
Who was right?
And once more, the
usual question arose.
Did the people who inhabited
the meseta in ancient times
remember the origin of
the finds in a place
the Incas considered sacred?
Pedro Cieza de León,
Spanish reporter with
the conquistadores, asked them
if they knew who had created
the strange shapes which
were on the plateau.
They replied that
they belong to men
who came from afar,
white-skinned foreigners
with a beard.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The imposing ruins of Chavín de
Huántar are 3,200 meters high,
lying between the
mountains of southern Peru.
They have been attributed
to the Chavín culture,
one of the most important
in ancient Peru,
considered the cultural route
of the subsequent Andean
civilizations.
This culture developed
suddenly in 1200 BC,
and its influence spread to
coastlines far from Peru.
The entire complex
of buildings is
set towards east
west, amongst which
the large temple, which
overlooks the entire site.
It is called El Castillo and is
built with various sized stone
blocks with a more or less
regular weight and shape.
The walls were covered
with large, stone slabs,
sometimes carved in the
characteristic Chavín style.
Similar carvings can be seen
on the columns of the temple
portal.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And on several stones slabs
of the ancient round square.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The walls of the Castillo were
adorned with over 200 stone
heads, called hollow heads.
Currently, only one has
remained fixed in place.
The others have been transferred
to the small Chavín museum.
>> [SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> Yes.
Here in the exhibition
hall, we have
heads with proud faces,
astonished faces.
Research claims that
these hollow heads
show people who are
in a trance state,
in a hallucinatory state.
These expressions would
terrify the visitor
who came to this area.
The hollow heads were stuck,
fixed to the walls of the main
Chavín temple.
>> The Chavín population
worshiped the jaguar god,
and its religion originated
from the atomic bond between man
and the forest,
a religion which,
as the museum's
director explains,
terrified its believers with
practices which probably
utilized hallucinogenic
substances.
It seems strange, however,
that a population with such
a primitive religion had the
knowledge to build the imposing
Chavín structures.
Could it be, perhaps, that
the Chavín people had simply
occupied preexisting structures
built by a population which had
disappeared and had
more advanced knowledge?
The Castillo is also
called Old Temple,
but by looking carefully at
it, rather than a temple,
it looks like a giant strongbox.
Its massive walls, in fact,
do not have any windows,
and inside, there are
no large worship holes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Underground, one of the
galleries leads to a small,
cross-shaped room, where the
most valuable and sacred Chavín
work stands out.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A granite monolith 4
and 1/2 meters high
with a monstrous, carved,
anthropomorphic figure
revealing animal features.
The style is typical of
the Chavín population
and represents the highest
divinity of that ancient
culture, the jaguar god.
The monolith is called
El Lanzón, the Spear,
and neither the passageway
leading to it nor the narrow
hole where it is placed
were suitable to hold large,
worshipping crowds.
But from a religious
point of view,
there is no sense in this.
Usually, a divinity
would be visited
by a large number of people
to be honored and worshiped.
Its life-size reproduction
can be admired in the garden
of the Chavín Museum
and leveled over a wall.
The aspect of the
jaguar god incredibly
resembles the
Viracocha depictions.
Stumpy legs, large belly, and
large head out of proportion
to his body.
Is this only a
casual coincidence?
Could it be another trace of
the passage of the mythical
Viracochas?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It is possible to access an
intricate, underground network
of corridors, holes, narrow
tunnels, air ducts, and a water
canalization from the open
entrances at the top of the Old
Temple and from others
spread in various points.
These are currently
unusable, obstructed
by debris and cave-ins.
But once, they connected the
waters of the two rivers where
Chavín de Huántar
nestles in the middle.
Huanchecsa overlooks
Chavín and Mosna,
which is at a lower height.
The water descended
from Huanchecsa,
and it would fill the
large, sunken square
in front of the Castillo
through its channels
to finally flow in the Mosna.
Could it be that such a
sophisticated water network
only had a ritual purpose, and
could the Chavín underground be
part of the legendary network of
tunnels which connected ancient
sites of a forgotten past?
Mr. Lopez, archaeologist
in charge of Chavín,
states that there truly are
underground tunnels which
depart from Chavín towards
other unexplored settlements
of the surrounding mountains.
>> [SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> The ancient Chavín population
mentioned tunnels which
connected an area
northeast of here,
about 2 kilometers away
in the higher mountains.
The ancient Chavín
people spoke of this,
so it is likely this
connection truly exists.
>> For the first time,
video cameras have entered
the tunnels in Chavín, some
of which are still unexplored.
It's a difficult path,
and the presence of bats
makes it even less accessible.
The network of underground
tunnels is intricate,
and the conjecture that
the whole structure only
had a religious purpose is
increasingly less acceptable.
Did the Chavín population
really build the complex,
or did it simply settle
in buildings it had found,
readapting these to
its requirements,
buildings constructed by
a population which had
disappeared and with
more advanced knowledge?
The American archaeologist
Ephraim George Squier,
in his book "Peru, Incidents
of Travel and Explorations
in the Lands of Incas"
published in 1887,
believed that two, distinct
cultural eras existed
in Peru's history, one extremely
ancient with the most advanced
scientific knowledge, and
the other much more recent
like that of the Incas with
a lower cultural level.
According to Squier, an
extremely hard to calculate
span of time, but
certainly broad,
passed between
these two cultures.
He is also convinced
that the ancient
and sophisticated
Peruvian finds are
evidence of an advanced
technology, heritage
of a forgotten humanity.
The tunnels unwind for
still unknown distances,
also due to the danger
of covering them.
Many are damaged or obstructed,
and in fact, in the end,
it becomes impossible
to continue.
Luckily, there are side
exits, which suddenly emerge
from the large, main square.
The tunnels and the entire
Chavín complex still remain
an unsolved mystery, and the
uncertainty of their real
origins is increasingly
more substantiated.
Who really built these?
Professor Walter Krickeberg, in
his book ""[INAUDIBLE] American
Cultures," sustains the
most ancient and advanced
pre-Columbian civilizations
appear suddenly,
apparently without any roots
and preliminary stages.
This can only be explained
by an external impulse, which
influenced ancient America.
An external impulse,
exactly what has been orally
narrated by the ancient
pre-Columbian populations.
The Viracochas, men
of great knowledge
and with extraordinary
powers, with their white skin
and beards, gave birth
to civilization once more
after the Great Flood.
[MUSIC PLAYING]